JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump's
use of Twitter has often brought
praise from supporters for
reaching out directly
to the American people.
But Mr. Trump has also
managed to spark controversy
in 140 characters,
and, today, his tweets
prompted some of the
harshest criticism yet.
Our John Yang has more.
MIKA BRZEZINSKI,
Co-Host, "Morning Joe":
President Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: As Mika Brzezinski
wrapped up her MSNBC show this
morning, President Trump had
a few choice words for her
and co-host Joe Scarborough.
Mr. Trump said the hosts, whom
he called "low I.Q. Crazy Mika
and Psycho Joe," were speaking
badly of him, even though
they insisted on joining
him at Mar-a-Lago.
Mr. Trump adding that, at the
time, Brzezinski was "bleeding
badly from a face-lift."
Within minutes, Brzezinski
responded, resurrecting
the little hands insult
that had been directed
at him during the 2016
presidential primaries.
Mr. Trump's words ignited
a firestorm, even from
his Republican allies.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R),
South Carolina: I thought
it was inappropriate,
beneath the office,
and not helpful.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: I wish,
I wish he hadn't made the tweet.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of
the House: I don't see that
as an appropriate comment.
I think, look, what we're trying
to do around here is improve
tone, the civility of debates.
And this obviously
doesn't help do that.
QUESTION: Did you see the
president's tweets about
Mika Brzezinski this morning?
Do you have any
reaction to that?
SEN.
SHELLEY MOORE CAPITO (R),
West Virginia: Distasteful.
JOHN YANG: And from Democrats.
REP.
BRENDA LAWRENCE (D),
Michigan: This is not
acceptable, Mr. President.
JOHN YANG: Principal Deputy
White House Press Sarah Huckabee
Sanders insisted the president
was just defending himself.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House Press Secretary:
I don't think that it's a
surprise to anybody that
he fights fire with fire.
But he's not going to sit back
and be attacked by the liberal
media, Hollywood elites, and
when they hit him,
he's going to hit back.
JOHN YANG: It recalled
Mr. Trump's past comments
about women, in 2015,
talking about journalist
Megyn Kelly, then of FOX
News, after she moderated
the first Republican debate.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: She gets out
and she starts asking me all
sorts of ridiculous questions,
and, you know, you could see
there was blood coming out of
her eyes, blood coming
out of her whatever.
But she was -- in my
opinion, she was off-base.
JOHN YANG: "Rolling
Stone" quoted him saying
of rival candidate
Carly Fiorina: "Look at
that face.
Would anyone vote for that?"
And there was the 2005
"Access Hollywood" tape.
DONALD TRUMP: I just
start kissing them.
It's like a magnet, kiss, kiss.
I don't even wait.
And when you're a star,
they let you do it.
You can do anything.
Grab them by the
(EXPLETIVE DELETED).
You can do anything.
JOHN YANG: Name-calling was a
staple of Mr. Trump's campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: Lyin'
Ted Cruz came today.
I watched little Marco.
I would say the co-founder would
be crooked Hillary Clinton.
JOHN YANG: And it continued
today, as the president of
the United States taunted two
cable television hosts.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more now on
the president's comments today
and earlier and the implications
of what he says publicly,
we turn to Matthew Dowd.
He's the former chief strategist
for President George W. Bush
in 2004 and author of "A New
Way: Embracing the Paradox
as We Lead and Serve."
And Beverly Gage, she's
professor of American
history at Yale University.
And we welcome both of you
back to the "NewsHour."
Matt Dowd, I'm going
to start with you.
We know we have seen
politicians get into some
tough language over the years.
How does what we heard from
President Trump today on
Twitter fit into all of that?
MATTHEW DOWD, Former Bush
Campaign Strategist: Well, we
have come a long way from when I
worked for George W. Bush in
2000, when he pledged to bring
honor and dignity back to
the Oval Office and won as that
as being part of his platform.
Judy, I think this
is a bigger problem.
First, as you know, in this
democracy, in order to have
a healthy democracy, we have
to get to the common good.
But the only way to get to
the common good is if we have
a common set of facts, which
we don't seem to have
today, and we have a
common level of decency.
And my problem with the
president and what happened
today and why I think it affects
the country as a whole
is, first, we bring up
our kids better than this.
We teach them not to do this.
We tell them not to do
this, and it is not the
right standard of behavior.
But for a president -- secondly,
but, for a president, he
sets the pattern of behavior
for the entire country and what
we can expect for how we each
other act and how we should
be in politics.
And, third, just from
a practical aspect of
it, just totally looking
at it pragmatically,
his behavior in this, in the
midst of what he is trying
to do on health care and the
votes he is trying to get, is
incredibly counterproductive.
So, from all of those avenues,
one from a history of our
democracy that is dependent
on a level of decency
that doesn't seem to
be apparent here, but,
two, just practically,
if he wants to get something
done, this makes it harder.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I
want to ask you about that
latter part in a moment.
But, Beverly Gage, how does what
this president is saying when
these kinds of tweets go out,
how does it compare from
what we have heard from
other presidents over time?
BEVERLY GAGE, Yale University:
Unfortunately, I don't think
that American presidents have
always lived up to the standard
of decency that we have
tended to expect of them, but
I think presidents before Trump,
when those moments happened,
they tended to be the exception,
rather than the rule.
So there was a famous moment
in 1950 when Harry Truman was
president, and a music critic
wrote a very critical piece
about Truman's daughter, who had
just given a singing recital.
And Truman fired off this
ferocious letter threatening to
punch the guy out, and telling
him that he was a gutter
snipe and an idiot and he was
going to kick him in the nuts.
Right?
So, it was pretty
aggressive language.
And there was a big reaction to
that at the time, a president
kind of attacking a private
citizen.
Many people thought
it wasn't dignified.
But nobody would have said
that this is Harry Truman's
mode of being all the time.
It was seen as a kind
of authentic moment of
outrage, and not a kind
of permanent presidential
style.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt
Dowd, is there a level
of dignity that Americans
expect from a president?
I mean, is there a defined
or undefined line over which
presidents shouldn't go?
MATTHEW DOWD: Well, Americans
expect our president to be human
beings, and as imperfect as all
of us are.
They expect us to make
mistakes and all that.
But one thing the American
public likes is, if you make a
mistake, you do that, you cross
that line that they expect
you to behave under,
then you apologize or
then you correct that
behavior and said you have
learned, you are going to do
better, you are going to achieve
better, and you are
going to serve a higher
purpose than that.
Let's keep in mind that
Donald Trump didn't
win because of himself.
He won in spite of himself.
A quarter of his voters
voted for Donald Trump
believing he wasn't
presidential and he didn't
have the temperament, but they
had hope that he would grow
into the office and become more
presidential.
That doesn't seem to have
happened, and I don't think it
will happen for a 71-year-old
man.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Beverly,
you know, apropos of what just
Matt just said and what you said
a moment ago, clearly, there
are moments when presidents
have grown angry, they have been
upset because they
have been criticized.
So is there some kind of
standard, written or otherwise,
for how a president is to speak
to the American people?
BEVERLY GAGE: I don't think
there is a written standard,
but I think up until this moment
there have been some
sort of accepted norms
that the president in
particular -- on the
campaign trail, it's
one thing, right?
That is a place where people
attack each other when they have
differences of opinion or maybe
even personal attacks
in that venue.
It is sort of expected.
There, Trump took it to a
new level as well, I think.
But when you are the president,
the idea that you cannot rise
to the office, that you would
attack private citizens, I think
that that is something that a
lot of people find troubling
and sort of unworthy
of the office.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt Dowd,
clearly this was part and parcel
of the president lashing out
at the news media.
He was reacting to, I guess,
some of the conversation
this morning on that
program, on cable news.
But what is it that the
president -- in any way
does this further the
agenda of the president?
You mentioned a minute ago
his health care plan, the fact
that he is trying to get this
health care plan through the
Senate, through the Congress,
and this takes all the attention
away from that.
MATTHEW DOWD: Well, I
think attributing any
every time somebody --
Donald Trump does this,
President Trump does
this, people attribute
some grand strategy.
I think what the president
really has is a lack
of impulse control.
He has done this throughout,
and it has actually
hurt him in the process.
He won the election,
but, as I say, he won
it in spite of himself.
Keep in mind, Judy, that there's
votes, three key votes that
are needed in the health care
plan, Shelley Moore Capito, Lisa
Murkowski, and Susan Collins.
And he attacks a woman
basically in a sexist way.
You can't argue any otherwise
in the midst of this, a woman
who serves as an anchor on
a television program.
None of that is going to be
helpful in getting those votes.
So, I think it is
counterproductive.
But anybody that goes to Donald
Trump, first of all, nobody
seems like they go to Trump
to correct his behavior.
But anyone that goes to Donald
Trump would have to make the
argument, this doesn't help
you.
I don't think
Donald Trump cares.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Beverly
Gage, does history
shows that Americans are
forgiving of a president
when they, I don't know,
go off the rails or however
you want to describe this?
BEVERLY GAGE: Well, I think
Americans have often warmed
to a kind of pugilistic style.
So Trump is not the first
president to kind of marshal
this hyper-masculinity, right?
You think of someone
like Theodore Roosevelt
bringing wrestlers into
the White House, et
cetera, or even a figure like
Ronald Reagan, who we tend to
have a much more benign view
of now, but actually
could be quite aggressive
in his rhetoric.
I think what is different for
Trump is that he is specifically
demeaning women, and he's
demeaning particular women.
It's hard to see how that is
going to be a benefit to him.
On the other hand I do think
the record is that often this
has worked as a kind of form
of entertainment.
Certainly, it is one of the
things that people liked about
Teddy Roosevelt, this kind of
man who wasn't going
to take it from anyone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
BEVERLY GAGE: So, unfortunately,
I don't think it's clear that
this is going to be something
that there is a lot
of incentive to stop.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt, what does
this mean for the president and
his allies in the Republican
Party?
MATTHEW DOWD: Well, I'm just
going to -- one response is,
is, yes, the president -- yes,
the American public
loves a fighter, but they
want a fighter that is
fighting on their behalf,
not on their own behalf.
So, he has not
connected the dots.
And these tweets are no
connection, as we talked about.
It is going to actually make
it worse for him to achieve
any legislative platform, as
opposed to better.
There is no connection in
fighting on Americans' behalf.
I think you saw today,
and as your piece laid
out, is Republicans
are upset about this,
they have grown weary of
this, they know it has made
it more difficult on them.
And I think, as his numbers, as
his approval numbers continue
to drop -- they're at the
lowest level of any president
in his first term or any -- in
any term at this point without
a scandal involved -- I think
it makes it much harder and
it sets up a problem for the
midterm elections in 2018.
And I think all of that,
Republicans are nervous about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But quickly,
Matt, they are still sticking
with him for the most part,
aren't they?
MATTHEW DOWD: For the most part.
And I think that is one of the
frustrations by many of us.
I think you can say, oh, just
discount his words and all that.
At some point, they are
going to have to hold Donald
Trump's feet to the fire.
And they can do that.
Senators can do that and
House members can do it.
They can basically say,
we are not going to
pass an appointment, we
are not going to pass
legislation until you
correct your behavior.
There is no way right
now we know, or there
is no evidence that we
have that they're willing
to do that.
But that is in the end what
they have control over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're right.
We have not seen that yet.
Matthew Dowd, Beverly
Gage, we thank you both.